This section of the Course is all about graphing Connex and conic sections and we are going to start
with parabolas.
So I'm going to show you the general formula for a parabola.
I'll show you in Python how to plot vertical and horizontal parabolas.
It's actually easier than you might think.
And then in the exercise you will learn the little formulas for the vertex the focus and the direct
tricks of a parabola and how to plot those in Python.
So let's begin what is a parabola.
Well a problem is basically just a function and that kind of opens up like this.
Now sometimes it opens upwards sometimes it opens out downwards like this.
And there are also these horizontal parabolas that go off to the side.
But in general all problems have this kind of shape where they branch out from some point over here.
Problem is are used all the time in particularly in physics for ballistics.
So for example if you're standing here and you throw a ball as high as you can and tilted or angled
a little bit in the air the trajectory of the ball is going to look like this.
Eventually gravity overpowers the force that you put into the ball and then it will fall back down to
the earth or the moon or Jupiter or whatever planet you're on.
So this is what parabolas look like.
There is a general formula for a problem.
And that looks like this.
Now this is kind of a weird looking and colorful formula.
It's not a formula that's in the sort of standard configuration that you're probably used to seeing
where the y is on one side and everything else is on the other side of the equals sign.
But that's OK.
When you're looking at formulas it's an important skill in math and particularly when translating math
into code to be able to have a bit of a bird's eye view and see what's going on in this formula.
So we can see there's still the basic thing so it's Y equals something with X but then Y is just shifted
by K an X is shifted by H.
And so I hope that when you see that or imagine that K equals zero and H equals zero then this is really
similar to the function Y equals X squared.
And of course Y equals X squared looks something like this.
And then we have this four P chunk here and that's really just a parameter.
Now I'll explain a little bit later on where these parameters come from and how to implement them in
Python.
You could rewrite this equation to be a function of y and it would just look like this.
And if it's not immediately clear how to get from this equation to this equation then I encourage you
to pause the video get out a piece of paper and a pen and basically do a little bit of arithmetic on
this equation to solve for y.
So you can see that there are three parameters.
There's the H parameter that's a shift on the x axis.
The K parameter which comes from here.
So that's a shift on the y axis.
And then there's one over for P.
And people often just replace this or substitute this with another letter let's say.
So this would be one parameter here.
All right.
So now I'm going to switch to Python and show you how to implement this formula for a variety of parameters.
We are going to need the NUM pi import num pi as MP and the Met.
Plot lib.
So import met plot plot lib dot pi plot as P L T.
Okay so let's start by listing some parameters.
I'm going to say that A equals 1.
So we'll start off pretty simple and remember now a is actually equal to one over for Y.
So in the formula in the slides I had this expression one over for y and here I'm calling that parameter
a.
And then we had H and K let's set H also to be equal to 1 and k about minus 2.
And now what we need to do is specify the x axis points to evaluate the function.
So I'll say x equals num pi Lynn space.
So we are gonna come up with linear least based numbers.
And what should they go between we need to specify the two bounds.
Let's start with minus 1 and plus 1 and we will see if that is a reasonable range and then I'm also
going to parameter rise the number of points.
So let's say there's gonna be one hundred points that we evaluate this function on.
All right.
So now we're ready to create the function using the second formula that I showed in the slides we set
y equal to a Times X minus H squared plus k.
All right.
So let me see I'm actually going to run this code first just to make sure I haven't made any errors
and I don't see anything down here.
This gets a number in here which means that Python actually ran this code and no error messages were
produced.
So that is a good science so now I'm going to plot x by y and peel to show I if I had a a euro for every
time I make this mistake here and I write plot that show instead of p l didn't show I'm sure I'd be
a millionaire by now.
Okay so this doesn't really look like a parabola.
It looks like a very gentle negative slope and we have no idea what's happening out here.
Maybe it just goes down and it stays low for all infinity.
So what is going wrong.
There could be something wrong with the formula.
Or maybe there's something wrong with the x axis.
While there isn't really anything wrong with the x axis but maybe we just haven't gone far enough out
so let's try.
How about minus 50 to plus 50.
Okay.
So that's looking a little bit better.
Now we see that there is definitely a parabola.
However it's not really clear where this thing is next to zero.
So how can we specify the X range a little in a more principled way.
Well one thing we can do is to consider that in the function the parameter H is the x axis offset.
So what if we would do something like h minus 10 to H plus 10.
So now notice that whenever I change the parameter H which is the D shift on the x axis that's also
going to change the range for the function or the domain for the function I should say.
So where it is on the x axis.
Okay.
So this is looking good.
I want to even make this a little bit tighter so let's make it minus five to plus five.
This I like because now you can you can basically see where the the peak of this parabola is where the
trough is down here.
So now this is pretty handy to have this soft coated like this because watch what happens if I change
h to be let's say minus 10.
Now we still get the problem to be centered in the graph and now it's centered at minus 10.
All right.
So I am reasonably happy with how this looks.
I think I just want to say I'm going to turn the grid on and I'm going to make the axis square.
I think this will make it look a little bit nicer.
All right.
So and then if you want this to be centered the way it was before then you could also change the x axis
limits here which I won't do in this case.
All right.
So this is for a a vertical parabola.
It's a problem that opens upwards.
How could we change the code here to get the parabola to open up sideways.
Let's say we one of the parabola to look like this.
So the answer in math terms is that you just swap X and Y.
So in that original formula.
So in this formula basically you just set this to be X and this to be Y.
And in fact doing that in Python is really easy because all you have to do is swap Y and X here.
So now I'm plotting Y as a function of x and Python still interprets this as the X axis coordinate and
the y axis coordinate the exercise for this video is essentially to produce this graph.
So what are we looking at here.
Here you see the function this is the parabola and then I've labeled two other points here.
That's called the vertex and the focus.
So the vertex is the minimum point here is the point where the parabola is curving around and then this
line is called the directorates.
And the idea of the directorates and the focus is that one way to define a parabola is to say that the
parabola is the set of all points that is equidistant between the focus and the directorates.
So this point here.
So the vertex here is equidistant between the focus and the director X..
And as you get further away know this point over here that's as far away from the focus as it is from
the directorates.
Okay.
So here are the expressions to get the vertex the focus and the directorates.
So now you should pause the video switch to Python and basically produce this graph based on this information
here and now it's my turn to switch to Python let's see it.
I think I'll just keep working with this graph here.
So x by y and just for convenience I'm going to turn off this access square and let me set this back
to 1.
How about.
Okay.
So here we have the parabola and I mean a comment here.
So this is plot the parabola and then the next day I want to plot is the vertex because that was pretty
straightforward plot the vertex.
So that's P.L. to eat up plot so that one was h comma a K and let's make it a red circle and we we should
label all these things or label this the vertex.
This will be labeled of course the parabola and let's see how this looks all right.
So that looks pretty good.
Activate the legend here
next I'm going to plot the focus of the plot the focus.
Now some of this code can be just copied and pasted.
So let's see this is the focus.
And that was a green circle.
And what are the coordinates for the focus.
Well it was still H but then here it was actually K plus P.
So where do we have this parameter p.
Mm hmm.
We actually don't have this parameter p here.
In fact it comes from here this was a typo earlier that should have been won over for P not one over
for Y.
So if a equals one over for P then how can we solve for P.
Well we need to do a little bit of algebra so let's say 1 over for P equals a.
And so therefore we can multiply both sides of this equation by 4 times P and that's gonna give us one
equals a times four times P.
And now to solve for P we divide both sides of this equation by a times 4.
So then it becomes 1 over for a.
Okay.
So therefore P is going to be equal to 1 divided by 4 times a.
Okay so let's try that.
Let's try writing this code now with a focus in there.
And well it looks pretty small.
Maybe we should focus in a little bit.
Or maybe I will tighten the x axis.
Let's set this to be minus 2 and plus 2 All right.
So that's looking pretty reasonable.
And now let's plot the directorates and plot the directorates so the directorates is a line.
It has to go from all the way on the left side of the x axis to all the way on the right side of the
x axis.
So how should we do that.
Well I think what we can do is take advantage of our x variable that we've already created.
So I'm gonna say that I want X to go from the first element of X to the last element of X.
And then what is it on the y axis.
Well the y axis is actually constant that director X never changes on the y axis.
So that's going to be the same number I'll call that parameter d.
And I haven't yet created D.
So let's say d equals and then from the formula in the slides that was K minus p let's see.
So then this needs to get a label of direct tricks.
All right.
So I'm going to run this and let's see if we get any errors coming from this line.
Aha.
And we actually do get an error the error is too many indices for array.
So the error is actually coming from this part right here.
So it turns out that what we need to do is index the variable or sometimes in Python it's called the
ignorable using a list not using two separate numbers like this.
So the solution here the correct way to set this up is to have a double square bracket like this.
It looks a little funny but that's the right thing to do because this is a list that we are inputting
into the variable x.
All right.
And now this is looking pretty good in this video.
You learned about the general formula of a parabola.
You saw how to plot vertical and horizontal parabolas.
How to plot the vertex focus and directorates of a parabola in python.
But I think the most important lesson that you got from this video is translating formulas from math
notation into code in Python and manipulating those formulas.
So applying a bit of algebra to those formulas to change how to work with them in Python.